
= CouchModel

The intent of CouchModel is, to provide an easy interface handle CouchDB documents. It also comes with a ActiveModel
implementation to integrate into an Rails 3 application.

The current version is under development and open for everyone to find bugs and post them into the issue tracker.

The code has been tested Ruby 1.9.1, CouchDB 0.10.0 and Rails 3.0.0.beta.

== Dependencies

If CouchModel is used without Rails, the ruby standard library (tested with 1.9.1) if the only requirement.

If the activemodel gem is installed, CouchModel automatically provides an interface to Rails 3.

To run the test suite, <tt>rspec</tt> (tested with 1.2.9) is required. A CouchDB instance is just required for the
integration tests (task <tt>spec:integration</tt>).

== Installation

The gem is part of the gemcutter archive. It can be installed by simply type

  gem install couchmodel

== Defining a model

To define a model, it's necessary to create a subclass of <tt>CouchModel::Base</tt>

  class User < CouchModel::Base

    setup_database :url               => "http://localhost:5984/test",
                   :create_if_missing => true,
                   :delete_if_exists  => false,
                   :push_design       => true

    key_accessor :name
    key_accessor :email
    key_accessor :language, :default => "en"

  end

The <tt>setup_database</tt> method defines a database for the model. The +url+ option is required and specifies the url
of the database in the scheme <tt>[scheme]://[host]:[port]/[database_name]</tt>. If the option
<tt>create_if_missing</tt> is set to true, CouchModel will try to create the database when the model is
initialized. If the option <tt>delete_if_exists</tt> is specified, the database will be deleted and re-created. The
option <tt>push_design</tt> will make CouchModel upload the design document assigned to the model during it's
initialization process. If the option <tt>create_if_missing</tt> is not specified or false, the database setup be done
manually by calling <tt>CouchModel::Configuration.setup_databases</tt> and
<tt>CouchModel::Configuration.setup_designs</tt>.

The method <tt>key_accessor</tt> defined access methods to the given keys of the CouchDB document. It's also possible
to use <tt>key_reader</tt> and <tt>key_writer</tt> here. If the <tt>:default</tt> option is passed, the key will get
a default value assigned during initialization of the class.

== Design documents

Each defined model has a realted design document, that keeps all the views for that model. Via the command

  CouchModel::Configuration.design_directory = "[directory]"

a directory is specfied that keeps all the design document. CouchModel will watch out for a file with the name
<tt>[design directory]/[model_name].design</tt> and will use it as the related design document. If no such file exists,
a design document will be created (but not saved to the file). The design ducument can be asscessed via
<tt>Model.design</tt>.

A design document should look like this

  :id:        "test_design"
  :language:  "javascript"
  :views:
    :view_name_1:
      :map:
        function(document) {
          ...
        };
      :reduce:
        function(key, values, rereduce) {
          ...
        };
    :view_name_2:
      :keys: [ "key_one", "key_two" ]
    ...

It will create the methods <tt>Model.view_name_1</tt> and <tt>Model.view_name_2</tt>, which returns the result of the
related view. It's also possible to pass some extra options like <tt>startkey</tt> or <tt>key</tt> to these methods.

The view can be defined by write down a map and a reduce function or provide the <tt>keys</tt> array. If the
<tt>keys</tt> array is given, CouchModel will generate a map function that emits the given array of document keys. The
reduce function will be set to null.

CouchModel also creates by default a class view. This view simply selects all documents from the corresponding model
and is assigned to the method <tt>Model.all</tt>.

== Associations

CouchModel provides support for simple association definition. Currently, the method <tt>belongs_to</tt> and
<tt>has_many</tt> are implmented.

  class User < CouchModel::Base

    ...

    belongs_to :session, :class_name => "UserSession"

    has_many :memberships,
             :class_name => "Membership",
             :view_name  => :by_user_id_and_created_at
             :query      => proc { |created_at| { :startkey => [ self.id, (create_at || nil) ], :endkey => [ self.id, (created_at || { }) ] } }

  end

In this example, the <tt>belongs_to</tt> adds a <tt>key_accessor</tt> named <tt>session_id</tt> to the user and also
generates getters and setters for the session object itself (<tt>session</tt> and <tt>session=</tt>).

The <tt>has_many</tt> acts as a wrapper for the specified view. The previously defined view
<tt>by_user_id_and_created_at</tt> emits membership-documents by thier <tt>user_id</tt> and the <tt>created_at</tt>
date.
Basically, the association can be accessed by a reader method. Options for querying the view can be passed by a hash.

  user.membership(:startkey => [ ... ], :endkey => [ ... ], :descending => false)

The possible keys for that query hash can be taken from http://wiki.apache.org/couchdb/HTTP_view_API (Section Querying
Options).

If a <tt>:query</tt> option is defined (like in the example above), the given method is used to generate this query
hash. When querying a view, the first arguments will be passed to the view and the result of the generator-method will
be merged with the query hash (if given).

  user.membership(created_at, :returns => :rows)

The <tt>:returns</tt> option extends the possible keys defined by CouchDB. If not given or specified as
<tt>:models</tt>, CouchModel will try to cast the returned rows into model classes. It also automatically passes the
<tt>:include_docs</tt> option to CouchDB. If this option is specified as <tt>:rows</tt>, a collection of
<tt>CouchModel::Row</tt> objects is returned that wraps the CouchDB result rows. That's maybe useful for views with a
reduce function.

== Rails integration

The following steps has been tested with the first beta version of Rails 3 (activemodel-3.0.0.beta).

First of all, the <tt>couchmodel</tt> gem has to added to the dependencies. This can be done by adding

  gem "couchmodel", :require => "couch_model"

to the <tt>Gemfile</tt>.

The configuration can be done by creating an initializer. Here is an example file
(e.g. <tt>config/initializer/couch_model.rb</tt>).

  CouchModel::Configuration.design_directory = File.join(Rails.root, "app", "models", "designs")

  DATABASE = {
    :test        => { :url => "http://localhost:5984/test",        :setup_on_initialization => true, :delete_if_exists => true  }
    :development => { :url => "http://localhost:5984/development", :setup_on_initialization => true, :delete_if_exists => false },
    :production  => { :url => "http://localhost:5984/production",  :setup_on_initialization => true, :delete_if_exists => false }
  }[Rails.env.to_sym] unless defined?(DATABASE)

This example uses an sub-directory of <tt>app/models</tt> to search for the design documents. It also defined a constant
named <tt>DATABASE</tt> that is initialized with the right database setup for the each environment. This constant can
then be used to define the models.

  class User < CouchModel::Base

    setup_database DATABASE

    ...

  end

== Development

CouchModel is still under development and needs to be tested. Any contribution is welcome!

